FOCUS #223: Charge Subcategory column (#218)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/dimensions/chargesubcategory.md

# Charge Subcategory

> Charge Subcategory indicates what kind of usage or adjustment the row represents. Charge Subcategory is a supplemental detail to the [Charge Type](#chargetype). It provide additional context to describe the primary category of charge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Charge Subcategory indicates what kind of usage or adjustment the row represents. Charge Subcategory is a supplemental detail to the [Charge Type](#chargetype). It provides additional context to describe the primary category of charge.
```

This linkage to the parent ChargeType means that for every entry under ChargeType, there is a corresponding Charge Subcategory that further refines the nature of the charge. It's a nested level of detail that allows users to see not just what type of charge was incurred, but also how that charge interacts with their purchasing agreements and discounts.

When Charge Type is "Usage", the Charge Subcategory specifies if the usage is accounted for by pre-purchased commitments or if the usage has not benefited from these discounts.

> When Charge Type is "Adjustment", the Charge Subcategory indicates what kind of after-the-fact adjustment the record represents. Adjustment Category is commonly used to identify changes like credits and refunds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When Charge Type is "Adjustment", the Charge Subcategory indicates what kind of after-the-fact adjustment the record represents. Adjustment type is commonly used to identify changes like credits and refunds.
```

ChargeSubcategory MUST abide by the following requirements:

- The ChargeSubcategory MUST be present in the billing data.
- ChargeSubcategory is of type String and MUST be one of the allowed values.

> - ChargeSubcategory MUST NOT be null or empty when ChargeType is "Usage" and the charge is covered by a commitment.

Author: ChargeSubcategory MUST NOT be null and MUST NOT be empty when ChargeType is "Usage" and the charge is covered by a commitment.

  - When a usage charge is covered by a commitment, ChargeSubcategory MUST be "Commitment Used".

>   - When a commitment is not used within the committed period, ChargeSubcategory MUST be "Commitment Unused" for the unused usage charge.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - When a commitment is not used within the committed period, ChargeSubcategory MUST be "Commitment Unused" for the unused usage charge.
- ChargeSubcategory MUST be null when ChargeType is "Usage" and is not covered by a commitment.
```

- ChargeSubcategory MUST NOT be null or empty when ChargeType is "Adjustment".
  - When ChargeSubcategory is "Refund" or "Credit", the charge MUST be negative.
  - When an adjustment applies to a specific item, the corresponding FOCUS columns that identify that item MUST NOT be null and MUST match the applicable item details the adjustment pertains to.

> - ChargeSubcategory MUST be null when ChargeType is "Tax" or "Usage" and not covered by a commitment.

Author: ChargeSubcategory MUST be null when ChargeType is "Tax" or "Usage" and not covered by a commitment or adjustment.

> - ChargeSubcategory MUST be null when ChargeType is "Tax" or "Usage" and not covered by a commitment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ChargeSubcategory MUST be null when ChargeType is "Tax".
```

## Column ID

ChargeSubcategory

## Display Name

Charge Subcategory

## Description

Indicates what kind of usage or adjustment the row represents.

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value          |
| :-------------- | :------------- |
| Column required | True           |
| Data type       | String         |
| Allows nulls    | True           |
| Value format    | list-of-values |

Allowed values when ChargeType is `Usage`:

| Value             | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| :---------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Commitment Used   | Usage charges that are associated with consumption of a commitment's underlying basis.                                                                                                                                              |
> | Commitment Not Used | Amortized usage charges for the portion of a commitment that has not been used. For example, if an organization has a commitment-based discount that is not fully utilized, the unused portion falls under this category. It highlights an area where the organization is not fully leveraging its commitments, which could be a lost cost-saving opportunity. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Used Commitment   | Usage charges that are associated with consumption of a commitment's underlying basis.                                                                                                                                              |
| Unused Commitment | Amortized usage charges for the portion of a commitment that has not been used. For example, if an organization has a commitment-based discount that is not fully utilized, the unused portion falls under this category. It highlights an area where the organization is not fully leveraging its commitments, which could be a lost cost-saving opportunity. |
| On-Demand |  Usage charges that are associated with a commitment |
```

I think `Commitment Not Used` is very unclear if this means a commitment wasn't applied to this row or there was commitment that wasn't used in the row. I think while the `Unused` vs `Used` doesn't offer a large visual difference, the clarity is probably worth it. Adding an On-Demand here also means its easy to group usage costs into course groups.

Author: @mike-finopsorg I dont think adding On-Demand should be in the ChargeSubcategory as it is already used in chargetype (chargecategory) If we added on-demand then all chargetypes would be considered subcategories

Reviewer 3: I do not see OnDemand in the Chargetype? https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/blob/working_draft/specification/dimensions/chargetype.md I think I am missing something that helps me understand your comment @thecloudman

> | Commitment Unused | This value would represent the portion of a commitment that has not been used. For example, if an organization has reserved instances but is not utilizing all of them, the unused portion falls under this category. It highlights an area where the organization is not fully leveraging its commitments, which could be a lost cost-saving opportunity. |

Author: Do we need this line: It highlights an area where the organization is not fully leveraging its commitments, which could be a lost cost-saving opportunity. |

> | Commitment Unused | This value would represent the portion of a commitment that has not been used. For example, if an organization has reserved instances but is not utilizing all of them, the unused portion falls under this category. It highlights an area where the organization is not fully leveraging its commitments, which could be a lost cost-saving opportunity. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Commitment Unused | This value would represent the portion of a commitment that has not been used. For example, if an organization has Reserved Instances but is not utilizing all of them, the unused portion falls under this category. It highlights an area where the organization is not fully leveraging its commitments, which could be a lost cost-saving opportunity. |
```

# Charge Subcategory

> Charge Subcategory indicates what kind of usage or adjustment the row represents. Charge Subcategory is a supplemental detail to the Charge Type. It provide additional context to describe the primary category of charge.

Reviewer: Yes, we're waiting to do that after all the columns are in because several columns have references to ChargeType and we want to wait for everything to be in before we rename it to ensure nothing gets missed.

> Charge Subcategory is a detailed descriptor within the billing and usage reports that acts as a supplementary detail to the main ChargeType column. It essentially dissects the primary category of charge to indicate more specific information about how each cost item relates to predefined pricing commitments.

Reviewer: Does "detailed descriptor" make it sound like it'd be a textual description? Suggesting some tweaks to simplify and align with ChargeType...
```suggestion
Charge Subcategory indicates what kind of usage or adjustment the row represents. Charge Subcategory is a supplemental detail to the Charge Type. It provide additional context to describe the primary category of charge.
```

> This linkage to the parent ChargeType means that for every entry under ChargeType, there is a corresponding Charge Subcategory that further refines the nature of the charge. It's a nested level of detail that allows users to see not just what type of charge was incurred, but also how that charge interacts with their purchasing agreements and discounts.

Reviewer 5: Seems like lines 5-9 could be summarized? feels like currently it's repeating a lot of stuff that's already said above. Below is a suggestion only that could be merged with the first line. It feels like listing sub category values for each parent value pattern won't be scalable when we look at upcoming subcategorizations for ServiceCategory etc.

```suggestion
This linkage to the parent Charge Type means that for every entry under Charge Type, there can be a corresponding Charge Subcategory that further refines the nature of the charge. It's a nested level of detail that allows users to see not just what type of charge was incurred. Current sub-categorization currently applies to Charge Type values 'Usage' and 'Adjustment'. Support for others will be added as needed.
```

> When Charge Type is "Usage", the Charge Subcategory specifies if the usage is accounted for by pre-purchased commitments or if the usage has not benefited from these discounts.

Reviewer 6: Isn't it the role of the Pricing Model dimension to specify whether the charge is covered by a commitment or not?

Reviewer: This is about whether the commitment was used or not. But I see your point about that not being clear... Thoughts on this...?
```suggestion
When Charge Type is "Usage" and the charge is covered by a commitment, the Charge Subcategory indicates whether the commitment was used or not.
```

Reviewer 6: A usage charge may not be related to a commitment (case where on-demand rate is used). For a commitment, the charge may relate to the used or unused portion. So there are 3 cases. How are they handled?

Reviewer: In that case, we're keeping this column null for now. We do think there should be a value but felt it's too late to lock it by EOW. We cover that on line 18 below.

> When Charge Type is "Adjustment", the Charge Subcategory indicates what kind of after-the-fact adjustment the record represents. Adjustment type is commonly used to identify changes like credits and refunds.

Reviewer 6: I understood adjustments will be used also for GCP SUD.
It may be worth mentioning, as GCP SUDs are important discounts.

Reviewer: We discussed this and landed on treating SUDs as credits.

Reviewer 6: Maybe the long form is OK:

> Credits can be used for certain types of discounts that cover multiple usage charges, like discounts for sustained usage of resources.

> When Charge Type is "Usage" and the charge is related to a commitment, the Charge Subcategory indicates whether the row represents committed usage or is an amortized charge for the unused portion of the commitment. Charge Subcategory is commonly used for scenarios like calculating commitment utilization when ChargeType is "Usage".

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
When Charge Type is "Usage" and the charge is related to a commitment, the Charge Subcategory indicates whether the row represents committed usage or is an amortized charge for the unused portion of the commitment. Charge Subcategory is commonly used for scenarios like calculating commitment utilization when Charge Type is "Usage".
```

> ChargeSubcategory MUST abide by the following requirements:

Reviewer 5: I think in other places we've said something like "adheres to " can we check and make consistent.

Reviewer: This is what we use in attributes:
```suggestion
ChargeSubcategory MUST follow the requirements listed below:
```

> When Charge Type is "Adjustment", the Charge Subcategory indicates what kind of after-the-fact adjustment the record represents. Adjustment type is commonly used to identify changes like credits and refunds.

Reviewer: Just realized we have an old "adjustment type" reference here...
```suggestion
When Charge Type is "Adjustment", the Charge Subcategory indicates what kind of after-the-fact adjustment the record represents.
```

- The ChargeSubcategory MUST be present in the billing data.
- ChargeSubcategory is of type String and MUST be one of the allowed values.
- ChargeSubcategory MUST NOT be null or empty when ChargeType is "Usage" and the charge is covered by a commitment.
  - When a usage charge is covered by a commitment, ChargeSubcategory MUST be "Commitment Used".

>   - When a commitment is not used within the committed period, ChargeSubcategory MUST be "Commitment Unused" for the unused usage charge.

Reviewer 8: Yes - I like Not Used vs. Unused

>   - When a commitment is not used within the committed period, ChargeSubcategory MUST be "Unused Commitment" for the unused usage charge.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  - When a commitment is not completely used within the committed period, ChargeSubcategory MUST be "Unused Commitment" for the unused usage charge.
```

Author: @aqu-erp can we say instead of not completely used, say when a commitment is not used (Fully or partially)....

- ChargeSubcategory MUST be null when ChargeType is "Usage" and is not covered by a commitment.
- ChargeSubcategory MUST NOT be null or empty when ChargeType is "Adjustment".

>   - When ChargeSubcategory is "Refund" or "Credit", the charge MUST be negative.

Reviewer 5: Seems like this is not something to enforce here? We have different metrics where its possible not all of them are going to be guaranteed to have this dynamic?

Author: @udam-f2  not sure what you are inferring here? Do you want to suggest a change?

Reviewer: Instead of having this line here, we should add a "MUST be negative" statement to the columns that we're requiring to be negative. For now, let's remove this from here. We can discuss adding it to other columns if we feel it's required post-1.0.
```suggestion
```

  - When an adjustment applies to a specific item, the corresponding FOCUS columns that identify that item MUST NOT be null and MUST match the applicable item details the adjustment pertains to.

> - ChargeSubcategory MUST be null when ChargeType is "Tax".

Reviewer: Looks like "Purchase" was missed...
```suggestion
- ChargeSubcategory MUST be null when ChargeType is "Purchase" or "Tax".
```

## Column ID

ChargeSubcategory

## Display Name

Charge Subcategory

## Description

> Charge Subcategory is a detailed descriptor within the billing and usage reports that acts as a supplementary detail to the main ChargeType column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indicates what kind of usage or adjustment the row represents.
```

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value          |
| :-------------- | :------------- |
| Column required | True           |
| Data type       | String         |
| Allows nulls    | True           |
| Value format    | list-of-values |

> Allowed values for usage:

Reviewer 5: Do we want these to be more specific?

```suggestion
Allowed values for Charge Type `Usage`:
```

> Allowed values for usage:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Allowed values when ChargeType is `Usage`:
```

| Value             | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| :---------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Commitment Used   | Usage charges that are covered by pre-existing commitments, such as capacity commitments or commitment-based discounts.                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 5: Why do we want to mix the two here? Wouldn't that not allow people to sum the cost covered by (or not covered by) commitment discounts? or are we saying they'll have to use another column to differentiate this (CommitmentDiscountId?)

Reviewer 7: This may be a carryover from the previous unreviewed CommitmentUtilization draft. 

Agreed the distinction here creates more confusion than clarity. 

1. By distinguishing capacity commitments from commitment-based discounts (which can have a capacity commitment component ie: GCP BigQuery), it implies the capacity commitment does not provide a discount. 
2. AFAIK, usage covered a capacity reservation produces billing data that could be sufficiently captured with on-demand usage charges `chargeCategory == Usage` and `chargeSubcategory == null`
3. The implication is that capacity commitments (with no discounts) could also create charges with `chargeCategory == Usage` and `chargeSubcategory == Commitment Not Used` and I'm not sure that's true

```suggestion
| Commitment Used   | Usage charges associated with the consumption of a commitment-based discount's underlying basis.                                                                                                                              |
```

Reviewer: The purpose of the original CommitmentUtilization column was to cover both, so that's why we did it here. Practitioners can use PricingModel == "Commitment-Based Discount" for filtering.

Reviewer 10: Can we use the "Commitment Type" whether "Discount-based" or "Capacity-based". I think we have a dimension for this, the "CommitmentDiscountType", right?

Reviewer 10: Can we use the "Commitment Type" whether "Discount-based" or "Capacity-based". I think we have a dimension for this, the "CommitmentDiscountType", right?

"Charge Type" is "Usage"
"Charge Discount Type" is "Discount-based"
"Charge Subcategory" is "Commitment Used" or "Commitment Unused" or null

"Charge Type" is "Usage"
"Charge Discount Type" is "Capacity-based"
"Charge Subcategory" is "Commitment Used" or "Commitment Unused" or null

Reviewer 7: After further review, my presumption may have been incomplete, I changed the suggestion to cover both discounted and discount-less commitments, but retained vocabulary to use less implied terms such as "covered".  @flanakin @chandra-cloudtrakr 

```suggestion
| Commitment Used   | Usage charges that are associated with consumption of a commitment's underlying basis.                                                                                                                                              |
```

> | Commitment Not Used | Amortized usage charges for the portion of a commitment that has not been used. For example, if an organization has a commitment-based discount that is not fully utilized, the unused portion falls under this category. It highlights an area where the organization is not fully leveraging its commitments, which could be a lost cost-saving opportunity. |

Reviewer 6: I understand there are 2 cases for charges with Commitment Not Used:
- The charge is for the unused portion of a commitment. The charge must be present for every commitment. The value MUST be 0 if the commitment is fully used. I would not elaborate on the potentially lost cost-saving opportunity, because a commitment is beneficial as long as the effective cost is lower than the negotiated cost (on-demand equivalent cost) over the commitment period.
- The charge is for a SKU that is billed at the on-demand rate. This is currently not documented?

Is it correct?

Reviewer 6: Maybe it would be clearer to have 3 values for Usage:
- No commitment: usage billed at on-demand rate
- Commitment Used: usage covered by a commitment
- Commitment Not Used: unused commitment

Reviewer 10: I think we have a blank or null value for "no commitment" that represents the usage is billed at on-demand rate.

Reviewer 6: IMHO, it would be clearer and better for filtering and for reporting to introduce an explicit value for Charge Sub Category for Usage when it relates to no commitment.

Reviewer: > The charge is for the unused portion of a commitment. The charge must be present for every commitment. The value MUST be 0 if the commitment is fully used.

The Discount Handling attribute might be a better place to convey the intent of the "Not Used" row. That row is only there _if_ there's an unused amount. Commitments that are fully utilized will not have an extra row.

> The charge is for a SKU that is billed at the on-demand rate. This is currently not documented?

Not exactly. This is where showing data would be helpful. The "Not Used" row is tied to the commitment, but not any usage (because there is no usage).

> IMHO, it would be clearer and better for filtering and for reporting to introduce an explicit value for Charge Sub Category for Usage when it relates to no commitment.

Agreed. We were keeping it null because we think there could be multiple values. If you only care about on-demand, then you can get that out of PricingModel.

Reviewer 6: > Commitments that are fully utilized will not have an extra row.

As a practitioner, I would find very convenient that are all commitments have an unused commitment charge, so that I can easily calculate every commitment utilization from FOCUS data and I find it's also better for transparency ("zero is a number like others"). The absence of unused commitment charge may also denote a data error.

Author: Null works here because you can then use the null value with commitment charges value to determine unused value.

Author: if all agree @marc-perreaut @flanakin  i will resolve this as we keep null

Reviewer 10: @thecloudman  - I'm resolving this conversation in the VS2 meeting

> Allowed values for adjustments:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Allowed values when ChargeType is `Adjustment`:
```

> | Commitment Unused | This value would represent the portion of a commitment that has not been used. For example, if an organization has Reserved Instances but is not utilizing all of them, the unused portion falls under this category. It highlights an area where the organization is not fully leveraging its commitments, which could be a lost cost-saving opportunity. |

Reviewer: Every time I see "Used" and "Unused" next to each other, I worry they're so close, they might get glossed over. What do others think? Should we use "Not Used" to distinguish them more?
```suggestion
| Commitment Not Used | This value would represent the portion of a commitment that has not been used. For example, if an organization has Reserved Instances but is not utilizing all of them, the unused portion falls under this category. It highlights an area where the organization is not fully leveraging its commitments, which could be a lost cost-saving opportunity. |
```

| :----------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Refund             | Negative charges that were previously billed and are being returned by the provider. Providers can have multiple types of refunds such as resolving a tax error or for returned or exchanged commitment-based discounts. |
| Credit             | Negative charges granted by the provider for various scenarios, like negotiated benefits, usage discounts, or promotional credits.                                                                                       |
| Rounding Error     | Positive or negative charges that are needed to ensure raw cost and usage data aggregations match the total cost on the invoice, which may be rounded.                                                                   |

> | General Adjustment | Positive or negative charges the provider applies that do not fall into other adjustment category values.                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 5: What's an example of when someone would use General Adjustment?

Reviewer 7: If a CSP under-charges over a period of time, and posts a positive charge for an adjusting amount in the subsequent period, I believe it would fall under `General Adjustment`. Not sure what negative charges could be created that are not `Refund` or `Credit`

Ex: Correcting previous bills where a SKU was given a lower price than intended, or applying a breach of private pricing spend commitment (true-up)

```suggestion
| General Adjustment | Positive or negative charges the provider applies to support contractual terms or to correct billing errors that do not fall into other adjustment category values                                                                                                               |
```

Reviewer: "charges the provider applies that do not fall into other adjustment category values"

Reviewer: @aqu-erp, does that also cover anything we haven't accounted for? That was the original intent.

Reviewer 7: 😆 I think `contractual terms` and `billing errors` also add color in a generic way that doesn't exclude anything, given everything on the invoice should be related to billing mechanics or described in a service agreement. I added the examples since the other descriptions had them as well, potentially seems less jarring this way.

Author: keeping the original and can be addressed post 1.0
